README.markdown, before:

A C Compiler written in C

Dependencies
------------

- C standard library
- `as` (tested with gnu-as and darwin-as [now clang-as], but any should be fine)
- `ld` (any should be fine)
- A C89 compiler to build this compiler with


Features
--------

The compiler implements C89, C99 and C11 (controllable via `-std=c89/c99/c11`).
System libraries are fully supported, including ABI compatibility with things like `va_list`.
There are some major additions, listed below:

- Features added:
	- Microsoft/Plan 9 struct extensions
	- Lambdas/Objective-C style blocks
	- Trailing return types on functions
- Standard support (not exhaustive):
	- C89, C99
	- C11 `_Bool`, `_Noreturn`, `_Alignof`, `_Alignas` `_Generic`, `_Static_assert`
- Feature support:
  - Floating point types
  - Unsigned integers
  - `char`, `short`, `long` and (on 64-bit only) `long long`
  - Wide characters, wide strings
  - `volatile` qualifier
  - `register` storage class
- Common language extensions
	- `__auto_type`
	- GNU omitted middle operand in `?:`
	- GNU keywords - `asm`, `inline` (in C89), `typeof`, `__extension__`, `__attribute__`, `__label__`, `__alignof__`, `__alignas__`
	- GNU Array-range designated initialiser
	- Computed `goto` / address-of-label (`&&label`)
	- GCC/Clang builtins (not an exhaustive list):
		- `__builtin_unreachable`, `__builtin_trap`
		- `__builtin_types_compatible_p`
		- `__builtin_constant_p`
		- `__builtin_frame_address`
		- `__builtin_expect`
		- `__builtin_choose_expr`
		- `__builtin_add_overflow`, `__builtin_sub_overflow`, `__builtin_mul_overflow`
- Code-generation Support/Optimisations:
	- Function inlining (`__attribute__((always_inline/noinline))`)
	- Position independent code generation (`-fpic`)
	- Position independent executable generation, permitting ASLR (`-fpie`)
	- Overflow-trapping arithmetic (`-ftrapv`)
	- Undefined behaviour trapping (`-fsanitize=undefined`)
	- Stack protector (`-fstack-protector`, `-fstack-protector-all`)
	- Symbol visibility (`-fvisibility=default/protected/hidden` / `-f[no-]semantic-interposition` / `__attribute__((visibility(...)))`)
	- DWARF Debug Symbols (`-g` / `-gline-tables-only`)


Extensions
----------

Lambdas:
```c
^(parameters, ...) { body }
^T (parameters, ...) { body }
^T { body }
^ { body }
```

The syntax for lambdas/blocks is similar to that in Objective-C. Closing over external variables isn't implemented yet, nor is the `__block` keyword.

Other forms with explicit return types, omitted parameters, and omitted parameters and return types are allowed.

When the return type is omitted, the return type is inferred from the first return statement in the body, or `void`, if there are none.
The result of the expression is a function block pointer (`T (^)(Args...)`), explicitly convertible to a function pointer.


Output/Targets
--------------

`ucc` can generate `x86_64` assembly, and had partial support for `MIPS`, but that's unmaintained at the moment. There are plans to add `arm` too.
The code generator can target Linux-, Cygwin- and Darwin-based toolchains (handling differences in PLT calls, leading underscores, stack alignment, etc)

Constant folding and some small amount of optimisation is done, but nothing heavy (the `feature/ir` branch plans to change this).

The ABI matches GCC and Clang's, or more specifically, the System V x86-64 psABI (modulo bugs, of which there is currently one - see [`nested_ret.c`](/test/structs/function_passing/nested_ret.c)).

`ucc` can also dump its AST, similarly to clang, with `-emit=dump`.


Building
--------

```sh
make
```

If you plan on building the shim libc, or customising `CFLAGS`:
```sh
./configure [CC=...] [CFLAGS=...] [LDFLAGS=...]
```

Installing
----------

`ucc` doesn't have a make install target yet. When run locally, `ucc` will use its own include files for `stdarg.h`, etc, but otherwise will use system includes and libraries.


Compiling C files
-----------------

POSIX 'cc' standard arguments, plus many additions, see `./ucc --help` for details.


Todo
----

- By-value argument passing for structure/union types (`feature/1st-class-struct-args`)
- `long long` types on 32-bit archs
- `long double` type
- Complex types (`_Complex`)
- Atomic types (`_Atomic`)
- Thread local storage (`_Thread_local`, `__thread`)


Limitations/Known Bugs
----------------------

- The preprocessor will fail to expand the latter of several function macros all on the same line (such as glibc's `tgmath.h`)
- The preprocessor can't handle function macros that cross several lines
- `__asm__` statements are incomplete (see branch `feature/asm`)


Examples
--------

`./ucc -o hello hello.c`
- preprocess, compile, assemble and link hello.c into hello

`./ucc -o- -S test.c`
- output assembly code for test.c

`./ucc -o- -S -emit=dump test.c`
- show the abstract parse tree

`./ucc -c test.c`
- (preprocess) compile and assemble test.c -> test.o

`./ucc -c test.s`
- assemble test.s -> test.o
(preprocessing and compilation are skipped)

`./ucc test.c a.o -o out b.a`
- preprocess + compile test.c, and link with a.o and b.a to form the executable out

`./ucc a.o b.c -E`
- preprocess b.c - a.o is ignored since it's not linked with

Commit message:

Add namespace pragma extension to readme

README.markdown, after:

A C Compiler written in C

Dependencies
------------

- C standard library
- `as` (tested with gnu-as and darwin-as [now clang-as], but any should be fine)
- `ld` (any should be fine)
- A C89 compiler to build this compiler with


Features
--------

The compiler implements C89, C99 and C11 (controllable via `-std=c89/c99/c11`).
System libraries are fully supported, including ABI compatibility with things like `va_list`.
There are some major additions, listed below:

- Features added:
	- Microsoft/Plan 9 struct extensions
	- Lambdas/Objective-C style blocks
	- Trailing return types on functions
	- Namespace checking
- Standard support (not exhaustive):
	- C89, C99
	- C11 `_Bool`, `_Noreturn`, `_Alignof`, `_Alignas` `_Generic`, `_Static_assert`
- Feature support:
  - Floating point types
  - Unsigned integers
  - `char`, `short`, `long` and (on 64-bit only) `long long`
  - Wide characters, wide strings
  - `volatile` qualifier
  - `register` storage class
- Common language extensions
	- `__auto_type`
	- GNU omitted middle operand in `?:`
	- GNU keywords - `asm`, `inline` (in C89), `typeof`, `__extension__`, `__attribute__`, `__label__`, `__alignof__`, `__alignas__`
	- GNU Array-range designated initialiser
	- Computed `goto` / address-of-label (`&&label`)
	- GCC/Clang builtins (not an exhaustive list):
		- `__builtin_unreachable`, `__builtin_trap`
		- `__builtin_types_compatible_p`
		- `__builtin_constant_p`
		- `__builtin_frame_address`
		- `__builtin_expect`
		- `__builtin_choose_expr`
		- `__builtin_add_overflow`, `__builtin_sub_overflow`, `__builtin_mul_overflow`
- Code-generation Support/Optimisations:
	- Function inlining (`__attribute__((always_inline/noinline))`)
	- Position independent code generation (`-fpic`)
	- Position independent executable generation, permitting ASLR (`-fpie`)
	- Overflow-trapping arithmetic (`-ftrapv`)
	- Undefined behaviour trapping (`-fsanitize=undefined`)
	- Stack protector (`-fstack-protector`, `-fstack-protector-all`)
	- Symbol visibility (`-fvisibility=default/protected/hidden` / `-f[no-]semantic-interposition` / `__attribute__((visibility(...)))`)
	- DWARF Debug Symbols (`-g` / `-gline-tables-only`)


Extensions
----------

Lambdas:
```c
^(parameters, ...) { body }
^T (parameters, ...) { body }
^T { body }
^ { body }
```

The syntax for lambdas/blocks is similar to that in Objective-C. Closing over external variables isn't implemented yet, nor is the `__block` keyword.

Other forms with explicit return types, omitted parameters, and omitted parameters and return types are allowed.

When the return type is omitted, the return type is inferred from the first return statement in the body, or `void`, if there are none.
The result of the expression is a function block pointer (`T (^)(Args...)`), explicitly convertible to a function pointer.

Namespace checking:
```c
#pragma ucc namespace expr_
```

This ensures that any declarations after this `pragma` begin with `expr_`, allowing you to enforce a namespace exported by each translation unit (`.c` file).

See [namespace.c](/test/pragma/namespace.c) for an example.

Output/Targets
--------------

`ucc` can generate `x86_64` assembly, and had partial support for `MIPS`, but that's unmaintained at the moment. There are plans to add `arm` too.
The code generator can target Linux-, Cygwin- and Darwin-based toolchains (handling differences in PLT calls, leading underscores, stack alignment, etc)

Constant folding and some small amount of optimisation is done, but nothing heavy (the `feature/ir` branch plans to change this).

The ABI matches GCC and Clang's, or more specifically, the System V x86-64 psABI (modulo bugs, of which there is currently one - see [`nested_ret.c`](/test/structs/function_passing/nested_ret.c)).

`ucc` can also dump its AST, similarly to clang, with `-emit=dump`.


Building
--------

```sh
make
```

If you plan on building the shim libc, or customising `CFLAGS`:
```sh
./configure [CC=...] [CFLAGS=...] [LDFLAGS=...]
```

Installing
----------

`ucc` doesn't have a make install target yet. When run locally, `ucc` will use its own include files for `stdarg.h`, etc, but otherwise will use system includes and libraries.


Compiling C files
-----------------

POSIX 'cc' standard arguments, plus many additions, see `./ucc --help` for details.


Todo
----

- By-value argument passing for structure/union types (`feature/1st-class-struct-args`)
- `long long` types on 32-bit archs
- `long double` type
- Complex types (`_Complex`)
- Atomic types (`_Atomic`)
- Thread local storage (`_Thread_local`, `__thread`)


Limitations/Known Bugs
----------------------

- The preprocessor will fail to expand the latter of several function macros all on the same line (such as glibc's `tgmath.h`)
- The preprocessor can't handle function macros that cross several lines
- `__asm__` statements are incomplete (see branch `feature/asm`)


Examples
--------

`./ucc -o hello hello.c`
- preprocess, compile, assemble and link hello.c into hello

`./ucc -o- -S test.c`
- output assembly code for test.c

`./ucc -o- -S -emit=dump test.c`
- show the abstract parse tree

`./ucc -c test.c`
- (preprocess) compile and assemble test.c -> test.o

`./ucc -c test.s`
- assemble test.s -> test.o
(preprocessing and compilation are skipped)

`./ucc test.c a.o -o out b.a`
- preprocess + compile test.c, and link with a.o and b.a to form the executable out

`./ucc a.o b.c -E`
- preprocess b.c - a.o is ignored since it's not linked with
